>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, SEPTEMBER 20:
THE UNITED STATES ANNOUNCES IT
WILL INCREASE THE NUMBER OF
REFUGEES IT TAKES IN.
AND, HOW SYRIAN REFUGEE FAMILIES
ARE STARTING OVER, IN GERMANY.
>> IT'S NOT EASY TO LEAVE
EVERYTHING BACK THERE.
BUT WHEN YOU SETTLE DOWN IN
ANOTHER COUNTRY, YOU FIND A JOB,
YOU LEARN A LANGUAGE, YOU
ESTABLISH A FAMILY, AND IT
BECOMES YOUR HOME.
>> Sreenivasan: ALSO, TIME FOR
SCHOOL.
IN BRAZIL LIVING IN POVERTY AND
FIGHTING FOR AN EDUCATION.
>> (translated): MY FUTURE IS
NOT GUARANTEED.
BUT THE ONLY WAY TO GUARANTEE
MY FUTURE IS BY GOING TO SCHOOL.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
THE UNITED STATES PLANS TO OPEN
ITS DOORS A BIT WIDER TO
REFUGEES, INCLUDING SOME WHO ARE
FLOODING INTO EUROPE.
THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION IS
PUSHING TO RAISE THE CAP ON
REFUGEES ADMITTED TO THE U.S.
FROM AROUND THE WORLD FROM
70,000 A YEAR TO 85,000 NEXT
YEAR, AND TO 100,000 IN TWO
YEARS.
THE GOAL OF ADMITTING 15,000
MORE REFUGEES NEXT YEAR IS
HIGHER THAN PREVIOUSLY ANNOUNCED
BY THE ADMINISTRATION.
CONGRESS NEEDS TO APPROVE AND
FUND THE RESETTLEMENT PLAN.
BACKGROUND CHECKS ALONE CAN TAKE
18-TO-24 MONTHS.
THE U.S. HAS GRANTED ASYLUM TO
1,600 SYRIAN REFUGEES SINCE THAT
COUNTRY'S CIVIL WAR BEGAN IN
2011, BUT NOT ALL OF THE
ADDITIONAL REFUGEES TO THE U.S.
WILL BE SYRIAN.
SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN KERRY
MADE THE ANNOUNCEMENT TODAY
AFTER CONFERRING WITH OFFICIALS
IN GERMANY, THE NATION THAT HAS
WELCOMED THE MOST MIGRANTS NOW
SEEKING ASYLUM IN EUROPE.
>> THIS STEP IS IN KEEPING WITH
THE AMERICA'S BEST TRADITION AS
A LAND OF SECOND CHANCES AND A
BEACON OF HOPE.
>> Sreenivasan: THE U.S.
ANNOUNCEMENT COMES AS MANY
EUROPEAN COUNTRIES ARE ERECTING
BARRIERS AND ISSUING TOUGHER
IDENTITY CHECKS AT THEIR
BORDERS, ALTHOUGH AUSTRIA
ACCEPTED 15,000 NEW ARRIVALS
THIS WEEKEND.
THE UNITED NATIONS SAID THIS
WEEKEND 80% OF THE MIGRANTS ARE
FROM WAR-TORN SYRIA, LIBYA,
IRAQ, AND AFGHANISTAN.
THE NEWSHOUR'S SASKIA DEMELKER
HAS THIS REPORT ABOUT ONE SYRIAN
FAMILY'S ODYSSEY.
>> Reporter: WHEN I FIRST MET
HAMEED AND GHOSON YAKDI, THEIR
FAMILY WAS SLEEPING ON THE
STREET NEAR THE HUNGARIAN BORDER
WITH AUSTRIA, ALREADY A MONTH
INTO THEIR JOURNEY ACROSS
EUROPE.
THEY LEFT THEIR BESIEGED
HOMETOWN OF ALEPPO, SYRIA, FOR
TURKEY, AFTER DAYS AT SEA TO GET
TO GREECE, THEY TRAVELED
THOUSANDS OF MILES BY LAND,
OFTEN WALKING, TO AUSTRIA, WHERE
THEY FINALLY GOT SEATS ON A BUS
TO VIENNA.
THEIR TIMING WAS LUCKY.
TWO DAYS BEFORE GERMANY
RESTRICTED ENTRIES FROM AUSTRIA,
THE YAKDIS WERE MET BY HAMEED'S
BROTHER, MOHAMMED, WHO ALREADY
LIVED IN GERMANY.
HE DROVE THEM THE REST OF THE
WAY TO MUNICH.
NOW, A WEEK AFTER THEIR ARRIVAL,
THEY ARE STARTING TO GET A TASTE
OF WHAT THEY HOPE WILL BECOME
THEIR NEW HOME.
>> (translated): THE WAY OF
LIVING IN THE MIDDLE EAST IS
DIFFERENT THAN THAT OF EUROPE:
THE LIVING CONDITIONS, FAMILY
ATMOSPHERE, EVEN THE ROADS ARE
DIFFERENT.
>> (translated): I FEEL SAFER
THAT WE ARE ALL FAMILY HERE.
ONE FEELS SAFE TO MELD INTO THE
GERMAN SOCIETY.
>> Reporter: LIKE TENS OF
THOUSANDS OF OTHER RECENT
REFUGEES, THE YAKDIS FACE A
CHALLENGE THAT WILL TAKE MUCH
LONGER THAN THE JOURNEY FROM
SYRIA: APPLYING FOR ASYLUM AND
INTEGRATING INTO GERMAN SOCIETY.
THE YAKDIS HAVE AN ADVANTAGE--
THEIR EXTENDED FAMILY IN MUNICH
HAS TAKEN THEM IN.
HAMEED'S BROTHER, MOHAMMED, CAME
TO GERMANY ABOUT TWO-AND-A-HALF
YEARS AGO.
AND THEIR COUSIN, RUAA, CAME
FIFTEEN YEARS AGO, AS A REFUGEE
FROM SADDAM HUSSEIN'S IRAQ.
RUAA REMEMBERS THE DAUNTING
CHALLENGE OF BEING THRUST INTO A
DIFFERENT SOCIETY.
>> IT'S NOT EASY TO LEAVE
EVERYTHING BACK THERE.
BUT WHEN YOU SETTLE DOWN IN
ANOTHER COUNTRY, YOU FIND A JOB,
YOU LEARN A LANGUAGE, YOU
ESTABLISH A FAMILY, AND IT
BECOMES YOUR HOME.
>> Reporter: RUAA HAS MASTERED
THE GERMAN LANGUAGE SO WELL THAT
SHE NOW WORKS AS A TRANSLATOR.
SHE WAS GRANTED ASYLUM, AND HER
THREE DAUGHTERS WERE BORN AND
RAISED HERE IN GERMANY.
>> YOU GAIN A LOT OF RESPECT
FROM THE PEOPLE HERE WHEN YOU
SPEAK THEIR OWN LANGUAGE.
>> Reporter: DO YOU FEEL
ACCEPTED BY GERMANY?
>> NOT ALL THE TIME.
WE HAVE OUR DIFFICULTIES HERE.
EVERYBODY HAS HIS OWN OPINION.
I CANNOT FORCE SOMEONE TO ACCEPT
ME.
>> Reporter: IN RECENT YEARS,
THERE HAS BEEN A RISE IN CRIMES
AGAINST IMMIGRANTS BY NEO-NAZIS
IN GERMANY AND IN THE FIRST HALF
OF THIS YEAR THERE WERE MORE
THAN 200 ATTACKS ON REFUGEE
SHELTERS.
BUT THE GERMANS I MET SAID THEY
WELCOMED NEW ASYLUM SEEKERS LIKE
THE YAKDIS, WHILE ALSO WORRYING
ABOUT LONG-TERM CHALLENGES AND
THE POTENTIAL FOR A BACKLASH.
>> (translated): ONE HAS TO
GIVE IT TIME.
PREJUDICES ARE COMPLETELY BAD.
HOWEVER IT PLAYS OUT, IT
CERTAINLY WON'T BE EASY.
>> (translated): I BELIEVE IF
MANY MORE PEOPLE COME, THERE
WILL BE A POINT WHEN THERE'S A
REVOLT IN GERMANY, BUT AS LONG
AS IT'S ONLY PEOPLE WHO REALLY
NEED ASYLUM, IT'S FINE.
I SAY, BETTER 1,000 REFUGEES
THAN ONE NAZI.
>> (translated): YES, I THINK
THERE CERTAINLY IS A POTENTIAL
RISK FOR GERMANY.
THAT THE EXTREME RIGHT-WING
GROUPS MIGHT GET STRONGER.
BUT NEVERTHELESS WHEN ONE SEES
HOW MUCH AID IS OFFERED TO THE
REFUGEES, THEN YOU SEE THAT
THERE ARE CERTAINLY MANY PEOPLE
WHO ARE REALLY GOOD.
>> Reporter: SINCE ARRIVING IN
2013, MOHAMMED YAKDI SAYS
OVERALL HE HAS HAD A GOOD
EXPERIENCE IN GERMANY.
HE'S SPEAKING GERMAN AND HAS A
JOB AS A FOOD DELIVERY TRUCK
DRIVER.
BUT AT TIMES, HE CAN FEEL THE
PREJUDICE.
>> I HAVE ALWAYS ALWAYS STRESS.
I CANNOT FEEL THIS MY HOME.
I NEED MORE TIME.
>> Reporter: FOR THE TWO
YOUNGEST MEMBERS OF THE YAKDI
FAMILY, THREE-YEAR-OLD ADAM AND
FOUR-YEAR-OLD FATEN,
ASSIMILATION SHOULD BE EASIER
AND QUICKER.
LIKE THE CHILDREN OF ALL ASYLUM
SEEKERS, GERMAN LAW REQUIRES
THEY BE ENROLLED IN PUBLIC
SCHOOL AS SOON AS POSSIBLE.
>> NOW, I DON'T THINK ABOUT ME,
ABOUT WHAT I WILL DO.
I THINK ABOUT THEM, ABOUT WHAT
THEY WILL DO IN THE FUTURE.
I SEE THE OTHER CHILDREN HERE,
AND THEY GO TO SCHOOL, THEY
STUDY, AND THEY HAVE FUTURE.
>> Reporter: BUT EVEN AS THEY
TRY TO BECOME PART OF GERMAN
SOCIETY, THE YAKDIS WANT THEIR
CHILDREN TO KNOW THEY WILL
ALWAYS BE SYRIAN.
>> (translated): I WILL
CONTINUE TO BE CONSISTENT
REMINDING THEM THAT WE ARE
SYRIANS, THERE DEFINITELY WILL
BE PART OF THEM FROM THE
HOMELAND THAT THEY WILL NEVER
FORGET.
SO WHEN THEY GROW UP, THEY WILL
LIVE WITH THE GERMAN SOCIETY,
BUT THEY WILL REMAIN SYRIANS.
>> Sreenivasan: CATHOLICS BY THE
TENS OF THOUSANDS PACKED
HAVANA'S REVOLUTION SQUARE TODAY
TO CELEBRATE MASS WITH POPE
FRANCIS.
FRANCIS CALLED ON THE FAITHFUL
TO LIVE LIVES OF SERVICE TO THE
VULNERABLE.
LATER, HE HAD A PRIVATE MEETING
WITH FORMER CUBAN PRESIDENT
FIDEL CASTRO.
THE POPE HAD FACILITATED SECRET
NEGOTIATIONS BETWEEN CUBA AND
THE U.S. THAT LED TO THE RENEWAL
OF DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS THIS
YEAR FOR THE FIRST TIME SINCE
CASTRO CAME TO POWER IN 1959.
WHEN THE POPE ARRIVED IN HAVANA
YESTERDAY, HE ENCOURAGED THE TWO
NATIONS TO STRENGTHEN TIES.
>> (translated): I URGE
POLITICAL LEADERS TO PERSEVERE
ON THIS PATH AND TO DEVELOP ALL
ITS POTENTIALITIES, AS AN
EXAMPLE OF RECONCILIATION FOR
THE ENTIRE WORLD.
>> Sreenivasan: ON TUESDAY, POPE
FRANCIS HEADS TO WASHINGTON,
WHERE HE'LL MEET WITH PRESIDENT
OBAMA AND ADDRESS CONGRESS.
GREECE HAS COMPLETED ITS THIRD
NATIONAL VOTE THIS YEAR.
THE FORMER PRIME MINISTER WHO
STEPPED DOWN IN AUGUST, AFTER A
DISPUTE OVER AUSTERITY MEASURES
TO HANDLE GREECE'S DEBT CRISIS,
APPEARS TO BE BACK IN POWER.
NEWSHOUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
MALCOLM BRABANT JOINS ME NOW
FROM ATHENS TO DISCUSS THE
RESULTS AND RAMIFICATIONS.
EVERYTHING SOLD NEW AGAIN.
>> Reporter: ALEX, HE HAS JUST
BEEN SPEAKING SAYING NOW HE HAS
A MANDATE FOR FOUR YEARS THAT
THE GREEK PEOPLE ARE BACKING HIM
TO DO FIGHT IN HIS PARTICULAR
CORNER.
HE PORTRAYED THIS As A
SUBSTANTIAL VICTORY BUT IT'S NOT
ONE, TO BE POLL HONEST.
THIS ELECTION HAS BEEN DEFINED
BY THE APATHY OF THE GREEK
PEOPLE.
THERE'S COMPLETE DESPAIR WITH
POLITICIANS AND POLITICS.
BECAUSE THIS IS A COUNTRY WHICH
IS PASSIONATE ABOUT POLITICS.
PEOPLE ARE COMPELLED SUPPOSEDLY
TO GO TO VOTE BUT THE MOST
IMPORTANT THING HERE IS THAT 45%
OF THE PEOPLE DID NOT VOTE
TODAY.
THEY'RE SO COMPLETELY
DISILLUSIONED AND WHEN ALEX WAS
FIRST ELECTED IN JANUARY HE WAS
ON A WAVE OF HOPE THAT WAS GOING
TO CHANGE THINGS.
BUT HE HAS DISAPPOINTED SO MANY
PEOPLE.
HE MAY HAVE GONE IN TODAY WITH
THE HELP OF HIS PREVIOUS RIGHT
WING COLLEAGUES TO FORM A
MAJORITY GOVERNMENT.
SOME PEOPLE THAT VOTED FOR HIM
SAID YOU PUT US IN A REAL MESS,
NOW YOU CAN FINISH THE JOB.
>> THERE WAS ALSO CONCERN THAT
HE GOT IN ON THE MANDATE OF
STANDING AGAINST THE AUSTERITY
MEASURES AND HE CAPITULATED TO
THE REST OF EUROPE?
>> WELL THIS IS ONE OF THE
THINGS THAT IS QUITE DROLL ABOUT
THE WHOLE OF GREECE.
EARLIER TODAY YOU HAD THE
MINISTER WHO IS FORMING THE
RIGHT WING COALITION SAYING THIS
IS A TIME FOR A NEW BEGINNING
AND TIME FOR GREECE TO GET TRUST
THERE'S NOT A LOT OF TRUST
BECAUSE HE PROMISED SO MUCH,
ESPECIALLY IN THE ELECTORATE AND
WHEN THEY VOTED NO IN THIS
REFERENDUM IN TERMS OF AUSTERITY
MEASURES HE COMPLETELY IGNORED
THAT AND CAPITULATED TO THE
EUROPEAN UNION AND THERE WAS A
TAXI DRIVER THAT BROUGHT HE HERE
TONIGHT THAT CAME UP WITH A VERY
INSTRUCTIVE QUOTE AND HE SAID, I
DON'T CARE IF WE HAD A SOCIALIST
OR A CONSERVATIVE.
HE SAID COME MONDAY MORNING WE
WON'T HAVE A PRIME MINISTER.
WE WILL HAVE A DUTCH PERSON
TELLING US WHAT TO DO.
THAT'S THE WAY MANY GREEKS FEEL.
THAT HE IS A PRIME MINISTER IN
NAME ONLY BECAUSE HIS POLICIES
ARE BEING DICTATED BY THE
EUROPEAN UNION.
>> FINALLY WHILE I STILL HAVE
YOU, THIS HAPPENS AT A TIME, AS
YOU HAVE DOCUMENTED, GREECE IS
ON THE FRONTLINES IN MANY CASES
OF THE MIGRANT CRISES AS WELL.
>> ONE OF THE MOST INTERESTING
THINGS INTERNATIONALLY REALLY
ABSENT THE NEW GOVERNMENT COMING
BACK INTO POWER IS THAT HE HAS
BEEN TALKING ABOUT TEARING DOWN
THE FENCE, WHICH SEPARATES
GREECE AND TURKEY.
NOW THAT FENCE IS ONE OF THE
REASONS WHY ALL OF THE MIGRANTS
HAVE BEEN COMING ACROSS VIA BOAT
INTO THE ISLANDS.
NOW HE IS VERY MUCH A PRO
REFUGEE AND HE MIGHT SAVE ALL OF
THE MY GRANTS FROM COMING ACROSS
THE WATER GUESS HE GOES THERE
AND PULLS DOWN THE FENCE.
HE HAS TO GET POLITICAL SUPPORT
TO DO THAT BUT THAT IS A FAIRLY
MAJOR THING TO LOOK AHEAD TO IN
THE FUTURE.
>> MICHAEL, JOINING US FROM
GREECE.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: MORE THAN 1,000
NORTHERN CALIFORNIA RESIDENTS
FORCED TO EVACUATE THEIR HOMES A
WEEK AGO DUE TO A WILDFIRE ARE
BEING ALLOWED TO RETURN HOME
TODAY.
THE FIRE NEAR HIDDEN VALLEY
LAKE, JUST NORTH OF NAPA, WAS
50% CONTAINED THIS MORNING, BUT
NOT BEFORE IT HAD DESTROYED 800
HOMES.
RESIDENTS OF FIRE-RAVAGED
MIDDLETOWN WERE ALLOWED TO GO
BACK YESTERDAY.
MORE THAN 10,000 FIREFIGHTERS
WERE BATTLING 10 DIFFERENT
WILDFIRES THIS WEEKEND IN
DROUGHT-RIDDEN CALIFORNIA.
VOLKSWAGEN IS APOLOGIZING FOR
RIGGING EMISSIONS TESTS.
C.E.O. MARTIN WINTERKORN SAID
TODAY, "I PERSONALLY AM DEEPLY
SORRY THAT WE HAVE BROKEN THE
TRUST OF OUR CUSTOMERS AND THE
PUBLIC."
THE ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
AGENCY ANNOUNCED FRIDAY THE
GERMAN AUTOMAKER USED COMPUTER
SOFTWARE TO CHEAT AND BEAT
GOVERNMENT EMISSION TESTS, BUT
ALLOWED MORE SMOG-CAUSING
POLLUTANTS TO BE RELEASED IN
TRUE DRIVING CONDITIONS.
THE E.P.A. HAS ORDERED THE
AUTOMAKER TO FIX 500,000 DIESEL
FUEL CARS MADE IN THE PAST SEVEN
YEARS.
V.W. COULD ALSO FACE BILLIONS OF
DOLLARS IN FINES.
>> Sreenivasan: FOR THE PAST 15
YEARS, A UNITED NATIONS-LED
INITIATIVE HAS CUT NEARLY-BY-
HALF THE NUMBER OF YOUNG
CHILDREN WORLDWIDE WHO ARE NOT
ENROLLED IN SCHOOL, FROM
100 MILLION TO AN ESTIMATED 57
MILLION.
FOR THE DOCUMENTARY SERIES "TIME
FOR SCHOOL," PBS CONTINUES TO
CHRONICLE THAT EFFORT IN SIX
COUNTRIES: KENYA, BENIN, INDIA,
ROMANIA, JAPAN, AND AS YOU ARE
ABOUT TO SEE, BRAZIL.
IN BRAZIL, THE GOVERNMENT
EARMARKS EDUCATION ENROLLMENT
FUNDS FOR THE POOREST 40% OF THE
POPULATION.
THE PROGRAM GIVES CHILDREN BORN
INTO SLUMS THE OPPORTUNITY TO
GET INTO CLASSROOMS AND IS NOW
BEING REPLICATED THROUGHOUT
LATIN AMERICA.
>> (translated): I DREAM THAT
EVERYTHING IS GOOD.
THAT MY MOTHER BUYS HER HOUSE,
THAT MY SISTERS AND BROTHER HAVE
THE THINGS THEY WANT.
I DREAM ABOUT BECOMING A SOCCER
PLAYER, ABOUT FINISHING SCHOOL.
>> Reporter: FIVE-YEAR-OLD
JEFFERSON NARCISO IS ABSORBED IN
THE IMPORTANT ACTIVITIES OF
CHILDHOOD.
BUT HIS MOTHER, LESLIE, HAS A
LOT ON HER MIND.
>> (translated): I WORRY A
LOT, BECAUSE SOMETIMES HE
DISAPPEARS.
HE GOES UPSTAIRS TO PLAY WITH
HIS KITE, AND IF I DON'T GO UP
AND GRAB HIM, HE NEVER COMES
HOME.
>> Reporter: RAISING FOUR YOUNG
CHILDREN ALONE IN ROCINHA, RIO'S
BIGGEST FAVELA, OR SLUM, LESLIE
HAS CAUSE TO WORRY.
DRUG DEALING IS A DAILY REALITY,
WHICH LESLIE WORRIES COULD
DERAIL HER CHILDREN FROM THE
RIGHT PATH.
LESLIE'S LOW INCOME QUALIFIES
HER FOR AN INNOVATIVE PROGRAM
CALLED BOLSA FAMILIA.
IT PROVIDES FAMILIES WITH A
MONTHLY STIPEND AS LONG AS
CHILDREN STAY IN SCHOOL.
IT'S PAID OFF FOR THE COUNTRY.
95% OF BRAZILIAN CHILDREN ENTER
PRIMARY SCHOOL, AND IT'S PAID
OFF FOR JEFFERSON TOO.
>> (translated): WHAT DID YOU
DO IN SCHOOL TODAY?
>> (translated): A DRAWING.
>> (translated): A DRAWING AND
WHAT ELSE?
DID YOU DANCE IN SCHOOL?
NO?
I WANT THEM TO TRY THE THINGS
THAT I NEVER DID IN LIFE.
HAVE THE FREEDOM I DIDN'T HAVE.
I WANT THEM TO PLAY BECAUSE I
COULDN'T PLAY.
I WANT THEM TO ENJOY, TO PLAY,
TO STUDY.
>> (translated): WHEN I'M
GOING TO SCHOOL, SOMETIMES THERE
ARE GUNSHOTS, SO I HIDE IN A
SHACK OR I STOP IN SOME OTHER
PLACE.
>> Reporter: IN ROCINHA,
VIOLENCE BETWEEN GANGS, POLICE,
AND PARAMILITARY GROUPS HAS BEEN
ESCALATING.
>> (translated): WHEN I SEE
THE POLICE I GET A LITTLE SCARED
BECAUSE THEY COULD SHOOT AT A
DRUG DEALER, AND A STRAY BULLET
COULD COME AT ME.
>> (translated): SCHOOL IS A
SECOND HOME FOR THE KIDS; FOR
SOME IT'S A FIRST.
HERE THEY CAN COUNT ON LEARNING
AND AFFECTION.
IT'S A REFUGE FOR THEM, SO THEY
CAN FEEL CONNECTED TO A MOMENT
OF PEACE AND PLEASURE.
ON THE FIRST DAY OF SCHOOL, THIS
LITTLE BOY, JEFFERSON, LOOKED AT
ME, A NEW TEACHER, A LITTLE
SCARED AND SHY.
GENERALLY THE KIDS ARE VERY
HYPER AND NEVER STOP.
BUT JEFFERSON IS DIFFERENT.
HE SITS IN HIS LITTLE SPOT AND
WAITS FOR MY ORDERS.
IS IT SWEET, SALTY OR BITTER?
>> (translated): IT'S SALT.
>> (translated): WHAT I FIND
INTERESTING IS THAT HE ALREADY
KNOWS HOW TO READ.
GENERALLY THIS DOESN'T HAPPEN.
MOST OF THE KIDS AREN'T READING
FLUENTLY.
>> Reporter: THREE YEARS LATER,
JEFFERSON IS DOING WELL AT
SCHOOL BUT AS HE GETS OLDER, THE
DANGERS OF ROCINHA WORRY HIS
MOTHER LESLIE EVEN MORE.
>> (translated): LIKE ANY
MOTHER, IT SCARES ME THAT MY
CHILDREN ARE GROWING UP AND
LIVING IN THIS KIND OF WORLD.
I'M AFRAID THAT MY DAUGHTER WILL
BECOME A WHORE AND THAT MY SON
WILL BECOME A DRUG DEALER WHEN
HE GROWS UP.
WE LIVE IN A SLUM, SO WE SEE
THESE THINGS ALL THE TIME.
JEFFERSON HAS A FRIEND THREE
YEARS OLDER THAN HIM WHO IS NOW
A DRUG DEALER.
SO I SAY TO HIM, "IF YOU CHOOSE
TO FOLLOW HIS PATH, YOU'LL HAVE
TWO OPTIONS DEATH OR PRISON."
>> Reporter: TO KEEP JEFFERSON
OFF THE STREETS, HIS MOTHER HAS
ENROLLED HIM IN A CHURCH RUN
AFTERSCHOOL PROGRAM FOR
UNDERPRIVILEGED KIDS, LOCATED
OUTSIDE OF ROCINHA, IN ONE OF
DOWNTOWN RIO'S MORE AFFLUENT
NEIGHBORHOODS.
>> (translated): I THINK HE
GETS WHAT I DO, WHAT I TEACH HIM
AND HE FINISHES EVERYTHING
REALLY FAST!
HE'S NO SLACKER.
IT'S VERY REWARDING.
IT'S VERY EMOTIONAL FOR ME.
>> (translated): WHEN I GROW
UP, I'LL GO TO SCHOOL TO BE A
MATH TEACHER.
WHEN I FINISH MY STUDIES, I'LL
BECOME A SOCCER PLAYER.
>> Reporter: BUT SUDDENLY THERE
IS A MAJOR SETBACK.
THE SCHOOL ADMINISTRATION, WHICH
SKIPPED JEFFERSON A GRADE, HAS
NOW DECIDED TO HOLD HIM BACK A
YEAR.
THE PRINCIPAL FEARS HE'S NOT
MATURE ENOUGH FOR THE INFLUENCES
HE'LL ENCOUNTER IN MIDDLE
SCHOOL.
>> (translated): HE'S REALLY
SMART AND RESPONSIBLE, BUT I
THINK IT'S GOING TO BE HARMFUL
PUTTING JEFFERSON, SO YOUNG,
AROUND CHILDREN SO MUCH OLDER
THAN HIM.
THAT'S WHEN THEY USUALLY DROP
OUT.
>> (translated): MY GRADES ARE
GOOD.
I STUDIED A LOT.
IT REALLY MAKES ME SAD.
EVERYBODY GRADUATED EXCEPT ME.
I JUST WATCHED IT.
>> Reporter: IT'S CHRISTMAS
2014, AND OVER THE PAST FIVE
YEARS JEFFERSON HAS STAYED IN
SCHOOL.
NOW HE'S IN 10TH GRADE AND IS
LOOKING AT LIFE WITH SURPRISING
REALISM.
>> (translated): I'VE CHANGED
A LOT.
I USED TO DREAM ABOUT BEING A
SOCCER PLAYER.
NOW I'M MORE CONCERNED ABOUT
HELPING MY MOTHER THAN PLAYING
SOCCER.
>> Reporter: AFTER MANY YEARS,
HIS MOTHER LESLIE HAS MADE THE
DECISION TO MOVE OUT OF THE
ROCINHA FAVELA TO A SAFER
NEIGHBORHOOD.
>> (translated): THE DRUG
DEALING DROVE ME OUT OF ROCINHA.
>> (translated): I'M LIVING,
AT MY BROTHER'S HOUSE IN
PIABETA.
>> Reporter: SHE ENROLLED
JEFFERSON INTO A BETTER SCHOOL,
BUT THE CLASSES WERE HARDER, AND
HE STARTED IN THE MIDDLE OF THE
YEAR.
JEFFERSON COULDN'T KEEP UP AND
NOW HAS TO REPEAT 10TH GRADE.
>> (translated): AT FIRST, I
WAS UPSET THAT I FAILED.
BUT NOW, I'VE ACCEPTED IT AND
I'LL TRY TO PASS NEXT YEAR.
>> Reporter: BUT EVEN IF HE DOES
PASS, JEFFERSON WILL JOIN THE
MILITARY FOR A YEAR, AS
BRAZILIAN MEN ARE REQUIRED TO DO
AT AGE 18.
JEFFERSON WOULD THEN HAVE TWO
YEARS OF HIGH SCHOOL LEFT, IF HE
WENT BACK.
DESPITE THE ENORMOUS PROGRESS
BRAZIL HAS MADE OVER THE PAST 20
YEARS, ONE THIRD OF BRAZIL'S
SECONDARY SCHOOL STUDENTS DO NOT
GRADUATE.
>> (translated): IN THE
FUTURE, I WANT TO GIVE MY MOTHER
A HOUSE, TO LIVE WITH MY
SIBLINGS, TO BE A GOOD PERSON,
AND I HOPE TO CONTINUE ON THIS
TRACK.
I PLAN TO GO TO COLLEGE ONE DAY.
MY FUTURE IS NOT GUARANTEED.
BUT THE ONLY WAY TO GUARANTEE MY
FUTURE IS BY GOING TO SCHOOL.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SUNDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: IN OTHER NEWS,
THE SPANISH-LANGUAGE VARIETY
SHOW "SABADO GIGANTE" HELD ITS
FINAL BROADCAST LAST NIGHT,
AFTER 53 YEARS ON THE AIR WITH
THE SAME HOST.
FOR ITS ENTIRE RUN ON UNIVISION,
THE THREE-HOUR WEEKLY PROGRAM
WAS HOSTED BY DON FRANCISCO,
WHOSE REAL NAME IS MARIO
KREUTZBERGER.
KREUTZBERGER HAS BEEN COMPARED
TO JOHNNY CARSON AND OPRAH
WINFREY.
THE FINALE INCLUDED VIDEO
MESSAGES FROM PRESIDENT OBAMA
AND THE FIRST LADY, ALONG WITH
LATIN AMERICAN STARS INCLUDING
SHAKIRA AND GLORIA ESTEFAN.
>> SO THANK YOU, DONE FRANCISCO
FOR ALL OF THE JOY AND THE
ENTERTAINMENT THAT YOU BROUGHT
INTO OUR LIVES FOR SOME YEARS.
YOU WILL BE MISSED.
>>
>> Sreenivasan: BEST-SELLING
AUTHOR JACKIE COLLINS HAS DIED.
HER RACY NOVELS SOLD 500 MILLION
COPIES AROUND THE WORLD.
HER BEST KNOWN WAS 1983's"
HOLLYWOOD WIVES," WHICH SOLD
15 MILLION COPIES AND BECAME A
TV MINI-SERIES.
COLLINS DIED OF BREAST CANCER IN
LOS ANGELES.
SHE WAS 77.
LAST NIGHT, THE NEWSHOUR'S GWEN
IFILL WAS IN CHARLESTON, SOUTH
CAROLINA, HOSTING A TOWN HALL
SPECIAL, ENGAGING THE COMMUNITY
ON ISSUES OF RACE AND CONFLICT
FOLLOWING THE KILLING OF NINE
CHURCHGOERS THERE IN JUNE.
HERE'S A LOOK AT "AMERICA AFTER
CHARLESTON":
>> MANY OF THE CONVERSATIONS
THAT WE HAVE ARE SURFACE LEVEL.
I AGREE THAT BRINGING DOWN THE
FLAG IS A MOMENTOUS OCCASION,
BUT WHAT WE'VE LEARNED IN THE
PAST YEAR IS NOT THAT BLACK
LIVES MATTER, BUT BLACK DEATHS
MATTER.
>> Sreenivasan: "AMERICA AFTER
CHARLESTON" AIRS TOMORROW NIGHT
AT 9:00 PM ON PBS.
>> AND FINALLY, TWO AMERICANS
HELD HOSTAGE IN YEMEN FOR THE
PAST SIX MONTHS ARE FREE.
SCOTT DARDEN WHO WORKED AS A
SECURITY CONSULTANT WERE
CAPTURED IN MARCH FIGHTING THE
ENEMY GOVERNMENT.
TONIGHT THEY ARRIVED IN THE
PERSIAN STATE OF OMAN THAT
BROKERED THEIR RELEASE.
AND ONLINE A CHAT WITH PETER
LANDERS ON JAPAN'S NEW RIGHT TO
DEPLOY TROOPS WHEN THEY'RE NOT
UNDER ATTACK.
THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
"NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
THANK YOU FOR WATCHING.